#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\begin_preamble

\usepackage{listings}
\lstset{
basicstyle=\ttfamily\footnotesize,
keepspaces=true,
tabsize=4,
breaklines=true,
columns=fullflexible,
mathescape=true
}
\usepackage{fullpage}
\usepackage[cal=euler]{mathalpha}
\usepackage{tikz}
\usetikzlibrary{shapes}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
duarte_theorems
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto-legacy
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "lmodern" "default"
\font_sans "lmss" "default"
\font_typewriter "lmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement h
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize letter
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 0
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
Questions I Want To Think About Sometime
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Duarte Maia
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
\begin_inset CommandInset include
LatexCommand input
filename "misc/lyx/macros_logic.lyx"
literal "false"

\end_inset


\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Visualizing diagrams (Vakil's thing)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Saturated bounding degrees
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
More generally,
 think about subenumerative degrees
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Consider a model of computation where a program declares some number of registers,
 and we have access to things like copy,
 increment,
 zero,
 comparisons,
 conditionals,
 and Turing-machine-like gotos;
 or something else,
 there's a lot of ways this could go.
 If we pick a rich enough set of instructions this would be Turing complete,
 and in particular this means that we only need a fixed number of variables,
 with an upper bound being given by however many you need to implement a Turing machine.
 Now,
 question 1:
 Fix some particular instruction set.
 Can you find the minimum number of variables?
 Question 2:
 What lies below that?
 Is the family of functions that results interesting at all?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Itemize
Learn and think about representations of real numbers and relations about them?
 Is the notation good or ad-hoc?
 I envision it could benefit from some OOP-like language but that doesn't seem to be a thing.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
