#LyX 2.4 created this file. For more info see https://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 620
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass presentation_notes
\begin_preamble

\usepackage{fullpage}
\end_preamble
\use_default_options true
\begin_modules
duarte_theorems
enumitem
InStar
\end_modules
\maintain_unincluded_children no
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto-legacy
\fontencoding auto
\font_roman "lmodern" "default"
\font_sans "lmss" "default"
\font_typewriter "lmtt" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_roman_osf false
\font_sans_osf false
\font_typewriter_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\use_microtype false
\use_dash_ligatures true
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 1
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\float_placement H
\float_alignment class
\paperfontsize default
\spacing single
\use_hyperref false
\papersize letter
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 2
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine biblatex
\cite_engine_type authoryear
\biblatex_bibstyle numeric
\biblatex_citestyle numeric
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification false
\use_refstyle 1
\use_formatted_ref 1
\use_minted 0
\use_lineno 0
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\is_math_indent 0
\math_numbering_side default
\quotes_style english
\dynamic_quotes 0
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tablestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\change_bars false
\postpone_fragile_content false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\docbook_table_output 0
\docbook_mathml_prefix 1
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Title
An Intro to Video Game Design
\begin_inset Newline newline
\end_inset


\size large
UChicago Math Dept.
 Pedagogy Seminar
\end_layout

\begin_layout Author
Duarte Maia
\end_layout

\begin_layout Date
January 21,
 2026
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Intro
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
Portal is a video game released in 2007 by Valve Software,
 and it was a very influential game for video game design.
 As a puzzle game,
 it is very important that it teaches its workings to the players,
 so that they understand all the pieces they will need and how to put them together.
 The game is widely considered to do so rather well,
 with a lot of development time being spent in addressing this matter,
 and in a bold move,
 especially for the time,
 spends a lot of game time explaining the mechanics – it's said that about 50% of the game is tutorial,
 which was quite revolutionary,
 as a lot of games at the time had really short and crummy tutorials and a lot of people would just skip past them because they were boring...
 And yet,
 Portal players would spend approximately 3 hours of game time playing a tutorial,
 often not even noticing it for what it was.
 Surely there is a big parallel to be drawn here!
 Like...
 The best type of teaching is when people don't realize they're being taught?
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
A note on why video games generally are a good topic to talk about here:
 Most types of media definitely care about the person consuming the media understanding the material,
 but in no other type of media is there so much incentive to hyperoptimize teaching.
 Like,
 sure,
 books and movies want you to understand the plot...
 But this is mostly 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

fact-type knowledge
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 you won't be solving any problems with this data (unless you're the type to try to figure out the ending before it happens,
 in which case the onus is on you and doesn't use any 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

type of knowledge
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 new to you from the book),
 and even if there are problems to solve and you don't,
 the medium proceeds anyway...
 Indeed,
 no other type of mainstream medium is 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

understanding-locked
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 like a puzzle game would be – if you don't understand how to solve the puzzle,
 you don't advance.
 In a sense,
 math classes occupy the worst middle ground:
 If you don't understand the math,
 you shouldn't be advancing,
 but the quarter proceeds regardless.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
Now,
 let's discuss incentives.
 In math classes,
 the student has a strong incentive to put in effort because if they fail that's bad for their future.
 For a video game it's like...
 If you're not having fun,
 you get up and go play something else,
 worst case you just wasted $60 of your parent's money,
 whatever.
 And if you don't like it,
 probably other people don't like it,
 and the game is going to get bad reviews and not make a lot of money.
 And if that weren't enough incentive to optimize for the player experience,
 you also have a fact that doesn't occur in math classrooms (aside from specialized contexts like video-recordings):
 When designing the first 5 levels for a game,
 you're designing something that'll be experienced – verbatim,
 without change – by thousands or millions of players.
 It is worth putting hundreds and thousands of person-hours into making this as seamless as an experience as it can be;
 unlike when designing the first class for a course,
 where,
 if it doesn't go that well,
 whatever,
 you'll do better next time...
 The diminishing returns kick in very early for experiences that will be seen by only ~30 people.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
Have audience play game for about 30-35 minutes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout point
Play until the end of dual portal gun level.
 If possible,
 play the first flinging level after that.
 Stretching it:
 Chamber 13.
 But that would be really good!
 It marks the end of the tutorial.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Dev Commentary
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
Use loads titled:
 
\family typewriter
ps_01
\family default
,
 
\family typewriter
ps_02
\family default
,
 etc.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_01
\family default
:
 Chamber 00 to elevator
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_02
\family default
:
 End of Chamber 01,
 start of Chamber 02
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_03
\family default
:
 Chamber 03 and 04.
 Node in front of portal is technical.
 Node at bottom of pit is technical.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_04
\family default
:
 Chamber 05.
 Observe slick design of pit,
 drawing players in and forcing them to notice both cubes and the raised platforms.
 (Maybe show off the softlock?)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_05
\family default
:
 Chamber 06.
 Only one node,
 about nonportalable surfaces.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_06
\family default
:
 Chamber 07.
 Only one node about the intangible rails.
 I think it's very relatable,
 except for the part where they found a solution.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_07
\family default
:
 Chamber 08.
 Second node is technical.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_08
\family default
:
 Chamber 09 (impossible).
 Top node is technical.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_09
\family default
:
 Chamber 10.
 Flinging tutorial.
 Important!
 Chamber 11:
 Dual portal gun start.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_10
\family default
:
 Chamber 11,
 load spot after going through first portal.
 Two text nodes.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_11
\family default
:
 Chamber 12.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_12
\family default
:
 Chamber 13.
 (If you have heaps of time,
 I guess.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point

\family typewriter
ps_13
\family default
:
 Chamber 13 (inside).
\end_layout

\begin_layout Section
Discussion
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
I don't have that much to say that hasn't been said already.
 I really like this game,
 and the tightness of the first few minutes is a big reason for it.
 The developers later went on to release a sequel,
 Portal 2,
 in 2011,
 which had just as much design wisdom packed into it – but it takes longer to get started,
 so would not have been as adequate for a pedagogy seminar.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
These same developers also released a bunch of other games,
 mostly shooters.
 And yet,
 even in those games,
 where maybe you would expect design not to matter as much (pew pew doesn't require that much thought),
 they still managed to make them very seamless experiences through very smart and calculated decisions.
 Example:
 Team Fortress 2,
 a shooter game that looks like this:
 (Show picture of tf2)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
In this game,
 there are nine distinct classes that one can play as,
 and against.
 One's reactions when seeing a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

heavy
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

 should be very different than seeing a 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

demoman
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

:
 The heavy has this gun,
 which shoots bullets,
 so you want to get away from him or get into a place with lots of cover;
 the demoman can only fight through grenades that are hard to aim up close but give him indirect fire,
 so you want to get up in his face,
 somewhere without cover,
 and preferably with height advantage.
 As such,
 since these decisions must be made in a split-second,
 it's very important to know at a glance what type of opponent you're up against.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
(Show dev commentary and class pictures.)
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
The point is that the developers prioritized what information they wanted to convey,
 and calculated how efficiently different modes of visual communication convey this information,
 and matched the most important data to the most visually distinct method.
 The silhouette point is more striking than it seems:
 Many shooters back then and now opt for a realistic type of visual,
 where,
 well,
 mostly every human looks the same.
 But in designing this game to look cartoonish,
 they gave themselves the opportunity to design visually distinct silhouettes,
 which aids the players in understanding at a very quick glance what type of enemy they're up against.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
These developers aren't unique,
 of course – though they're definitely a couple of standard deviations above the mean,
 and the fact that they've released 13 critically acclaimed games since 2004 is a testament to the fact that they 
\emph on
are
\emph default
 good at their job.
 But there are a lot more designers out there making a lot more games that have just as much thought and effort put into them as these games did,
 and honestly,
 I think there's probably more stuff that can be learned from them.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Point
One more thing on video games:
 One benefit that they have,
 in terms of designability,
 relative to math classes,
 is that they can afford to have dozens of people play their game (being paid to do so) and modify the material in the face of that.
 Moreover,
 these people are trained in playtesting – knowing how to play games in the way that is most useful from the perspective of generating feedback for developers...
 and I suppose you could kind of do that for math,
 to train 
\begin_inset Quotes eld
\end_inset

reverse classroom playtesters
\begin_inset Quotes erd
\end_inset

,
 but it'd be pretty difficult for someone to learn calculus for the 10th time whilst retaining the perspective of someone new to the subject (while every playtester playing a new game does have roughly the mindset of someone new to that game,
 because most games do not have exactly the same mechanics as other games).
 Anyway,
 right now the best we have,
 I think,
 is having people who already know the material we're teaching look over our material through the eyes of someone they're modeling in their head,
 who does not already know the material,
 which is very imperfect,
 and alternatively having test subjects go through whatever material we've designed,
 even though if it's poorly designed they're the ones who end up underprepared,
 and just having to rely on their imperfect feedback (they don't necessarily know what the endgoal is...) to enact modifications for the next iteration.
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
